Add Data Viz Foundation (#5709)
jpmorganchase/salt-ds: site/docs/foundations/data-visualization/chart-anatomy.mdx

<Image
  src="/img/foundations/dataviz-labels.png"
  srcDark="/img/foundations/dataviz-labels-dark.png"
  alt="Diagram of labels on a bar chart."
/>

### Axes title

The axis title should summarize the variables shown. Consider including the unit of measurement in the title to avoid repeating it on the axis labels, e.g., M for millions, or for percentages.

### Axes labels

Label each axis clearly and concisely to reduce visual clutter. Simplify axis labels by including the unit of measurement in the axis title. Keep labels horizontal where possible to maintain readability.

## Grid lines

Grid lines are vertical or horizontal lines that divide a chart, helping users read data values and make visual comparisons.

When possible, keep the number of grid lines to a minimum to prevent your chart becoming cluttered. Some charts require both horizontal and vertical grid lines, i.e. bubble and scatter chart. This is built into the Salt chart package and doesn’t require manual adjustment.

> <Image

Reviewer: Could we put values on the grid lines? e.g. $5m, $10m, $15m, $20m. Also, would it be of benefit to show the other alternatives e.g. vertical lines (months?) and both vert and horizontal.

Author: Strayed away from showing vert + horizontal at Tymon's request due to this not being a default on most charts and slighlty more tricky to configure.

  src="/img/foundations/dataviz-grid.png"
  srcDark="/img/foundations/dataviz-grid-dark.png"
  alt="Diagram of grid lines used in a chart."
/>

## Legends

### Usage

> The legend uses symbols and labels to identify each data series and its corresponding segment within the chart. In Salt, the legend is an opt-in feature.

Reviewer: I agree.

Certain chart types, such as scatter and bubble charts, use legend symbols that visually match the representation of the data points within the chart. This is a design choice that enhances clarity and makes the chart easier to interpret.

<Image
  src="/img/foundations/dataviz-legend.png"
  srcDark="/img/foundations/dataviz-legend-dark.png"
  alt="Diagram of different legend types."
/>

> ### Legend layouts

Reviewer: Should it be 'legend position'?

Author: Adjusted

Position your legend where it’s most appropriate in your layout, considering the number of legend items. In Salt, chart legends are preset to be vertical and right-aligned. Use a vertical layout when displaying many legend items, if space allows.

<Image
  src="/img/foundations/dataviz-legend-layouts.png"
  srcDark="/img/foundations/dataviz-legend-layouts-dark.png"
  alt="Diagram of different legend orientations."
/>

### Pagination

> When you have more legend items than available to fit in the height of the chart, default pagination will be used. This is should not be confused with the Salt Pagination component.

Reviewer: As with Josh' comments above, I'm not sure we should highlight our implementation. I find this was a little tricky to understand/visualise. Maybe consider removing Pagination as a section.

Author: Removed section

## User interactions

> 

Reviewer: Is it worth rephrasing this to say something like "charts can benefit from interactions to help users focus on or reveal additional information about a charts data. Salt support tooltips that can appear on hover_... etc_.

Author: Adjusted

Salt charts include interactions that help users focus on or reveal additional information about your chart data, for example:

- Tooltips that appear on hover
- Individual data series or points that users can show, hide or highlight

### Selected state

Users can select or click on a legend item to show or hide the related data series, isolating data points that are important to them.

> <Image

Reviewer: Is this reflective of the interaction? I can see the opacity change in the legend but not in the chart.

Reviewer: I can't see the screenshot, would you be able to share it on Teams?

  src="/img/foundations/dataviz-selected.png"
  srcDark="/img/foundations/dataviz-selected-dark.png"
  alt="Diagram of a bar chart in a selected state."
/>

### Hover state

When a user hovers over a data series, that series is highlighted. Simultaneously, other data series are dimmed in opacity. De-emphasizing the other series helps reduce visual noise, particularly in dense charts, and further highlights the data points in the hovered state.

> <Image

Reviewer: Can we include a cursor in the image to emphasis the hover state? Also should the labels be greyed out for the sections not hovered over?

Author: Added in a cursor. Labels don't grey out in Highcharts hover state.

  src="/img/foundations/dataviz-hover.png"
  srcDark="/img/foundations/dataviz-hover-dark.png"
  alt="Diagram of a pie chart in a hover state."
/>

### Tooltip

> The tooltip is a flexible tool for communicating within the chart, highlighting certain calculations or data points. Visually, the tooltip box border color matches the color of the selected data series.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tooltips are a flexible way to communicate details within a chart, such as highlighting specific calculations or data points. Visually, the tooltip’s border color matches the color of the selected data series, helping users quickly associate the information with the relevant chart element.
```

> 

Author: Done

---
title: Chart anatomy
layout: DetailTechnical
sidebar:
  priority: 4
---

Understanding the principles of chart anatomy is important to learning how the different parts of Salt charts work. 

This will include: 

- Axis title
- Axis label
- Legend
- Grid lines

<Image
  src="/img/foundations/dataviz-anatomy.png"
  srcDark="/img/foundations/dataviz-anatomy-dark.png"
  alt="Diagram of a typical bar chart anatomy."
/>

## Titles

The chart’s title should summarize the data on display. If revealing key findings, supporting an argument, story or message, capture it in the title.

> ## Axes

Reviewer 2: Would you benefit from an image in this section, that puts your recommendation into practice?

Horizontal (x) and vertical (y) axes display two variables and include their range, scale and units of measurement. Axes are used in two-dimensional charts, with each axis representing a measure of data.

### Axes title

The axis title should summarize the variables shown. Consider including the unit of measurement in the title to avoid repeating it on the axis labels, e.g., M for millions, or for percentages.

### Axes labels

> Label each axis clearly and concisely to reduce visual clutter. Simplify axis labels by including the unit of measurement in the axis title. Keep labels horizontal where possible to maintain readability.

Reviewer 2: You're repeating yourself in this sentence. See Axes title.

Reviewer 2: I think there is a point missing here with horizontal labels? The goal is to keep labels horizontal 
(not vertical or at an angle) to improve legibility... which may require changing the orientation of the chart so horizontal labels align with the chart graphics.

<Image
  src="/img/foundations/dataviz-grid.png"
  srcDark="/img/foundations/dataviz-grid-dark.png"
  alt="Diagram of grid lines used in a chart."
/>

## Legends

Legends are optional elements in a chart that use symbols and labels to identify each data series and its corresponding segment within the chart.

Certain chart types, such as scatter and bubble charts, use legend symbols that visually match the representation of the data points within the chart. This is a design choice that enhances clarity and makes the chart easier to interpret.

<Image
  src="/img/foundations/dataviz-legend.png"
  srcDark="/img/foundations/dataviz-legend-dark.png"
  alt="Diagram of different legend types."
/>

### Legend position

Position your legend to the right or below the chart where it’s most appropriate in your layout, considering the number of legend items. Use a vertical position when displaying many legend items, if space allows.

<Image
  src="/img/foundations/dataviz-legend-layouts.png"
  srcDark="/img/foundations/dataviz-legend-layouts-dark.png"
  alt="Diagram of different legend orientations."
/>

> ## User interactions

Reviewer 2: This was an unexpected section. It's not anatomy. You could put Selected state in the Legends section and have Tooltip as it's own section... which may make more sense under Anatomy. (See my additional comment about Hover state).

Author: Done - Selected state in Legends and made Tooltip it's own.

Charts benefit from interactions to help users focus on or reveal additional information about the chart's data, for example:

- Tooltips that appear on hover
- Individual data series or points that users can show, hide or highlight

### Selected state

Users can select or click on a legend item to show or hide the related data series, isolating data points that are important to them.

<Image
  src="/img/foundations/dataviz-selected.png"
  srcDark="/img/foundations/dataviz-selected-dark.png"
  alt="Diagram of a bar chart in a selected state."
/>

> ### Hover state

Reviewer 2: What is the user benefit of this? Highlighting a section on hover serves what purpose? Is this better combined with the tooltip section beneath? Is there another benefit to the user?

Author: I've removed the hover state section and added in a short sentence about it in the tooltip section.
